noted : 19/01/23

# Structure of the Intent

## The Internet

The internet is a network of inter-connected networks. It is also the biggest WAN.  
WWW is a collection of resources accessed via the internet.

## Structure of the Internet

The main part of the internet is known as backbone. This is a mesh of super-fast fibre-optic cables and routers that transfer data.
These points are connected to other regional networks - controlled by internet Service providers (ISP).

## Connecting to the Internet

Users connect to the internet via an ISP (internet service provider), to access resources.

## Internet Addresses

Each device on a network needs to be uniquely identified so data can be sent to the correct destination.

-   like an address on a letter
    So the IP addressing system is used

### IP addressing

Indicate where a packet of data it to be sent to or has been sent from. Routers use the address to direct the packet.  
IPv4 addresses are made of four octet values (numbers described by 8 bits). separated by a full stop. This provides only 4.3 billion addresses

IPv6 addresses (128 bit). allows for more

## URL (Uniform Resource Locator)

URLs are used to specify the means of accessing a resource across a network and it's location.  
The protocol and domain name of the resource together form the URL.  
Consists of:

-   Method - http(s)
-   Host - www
-   Domain Name
-   Location - index.html
-   Resource - "#element"

## DNS (Domain Name Systems)

A dedicated system with an index of domain names and their IP address.  
Typing a domain into a browser causes a DNS request and returns an IP address that is understood by the device

## DNS server structure

There are 13 root DNS server that work together to catalogue every domain name.

-   these are segmented into geo groups or levels
-   when the IP address of a given domain is unknown, it is referred to a related domain server that may know it.
    they are normally responsible for the top level domains

Domain names identify the area that a resource is in. These are then structured into a hierarchy tree.  
There are 13 root DNS servers that catalogue every domain name  
These are segmented into geo graphical groupings/levels  
When an IP address is not know, it is referred to another relevant server

## Resolving an IP address

If a client has no cached record of an IP address for 'www.google.co.uk'
It sends a DNS query for that domain to it's specified DNS server  
If the DNS server does not have a record for it, then:  
either recursively handles the request so it can deliver an IP address  
or refers to a DNS server authoritative for example, .uk and follow this and subsequent referrals, to successively lower=level DNS servers

## Internet Registries

domains and IP's must be unique.  
There are 5 global Registries are responsible for allocating IP addresses to specific domain names.  
They work together to maintain a database of address assignments that ensure an IP and domain names are unique.

## Internet Registrars

## Local Area Network (LAN)

A computer not connected to any other device is called a 'standalone'.  
All networks fall into 1 of 2 categories:

-   LAN
-   WAN

LAN: 2 or more computers connected together within a small geographical area.

## Network Topologies

A topologie is the arranfement of various computing devices which make up a computer.

### Bus

All nodes are connected to a single backbone cable.
Each end of the backbone is connected to either a terminator or computer which stops signals bouncing back.  
Each node is pasive - this means that  
Data is sent in one direction at a time only.  
Only 1 computer can transmit sucessfully at any 1 time

| Advantages                  | Disadvantages                                                 |
| :-------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------ |
| cheap to set up             | main cable is a point of faliure                              |
| Devices can easily be added | Limited cable length                                          |
| Good for small networks     | performance degrades with heavy use, owing to data collisions |
|                             | poor security                                                 |

### Star

Computers are connected to a central node. This is often a switch.  
A switch sends each communication to the specific computer it is needed for.

| Advantages                                                             | Disadvantages                      |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------- | :--------------------------------- |
| Easy to isolate problems                                               | expensive to set up                |
| better performance                                                     | central device is point of failure |
| more secure if a switch is used, as data is only sent to the recipient |                                    |

## Physical vs Logical Topology

The physical topology of a network defines how the devices are physically conntected (wiring), whereas the logical topology defines how the devices communicate across those physical topologies (shape of path that data travels in).

## Wi-Fi

Wi-Fi is a wireless networking tech that provides high-speed internet connections.  
Devices connected to the internet via a WAP.

### Wireless components

-   Network interface Card (NIC)
-   A station - consists of a computer and NIC- they share a radio frequency channel
-   Wireless Access Point (WAP)
-   Router - WAP and modem built into router

### Connecting to a wireless network

A wireless network requires a WAP. This has a range
