noted : 29/09/23

# Computing Related Legislation

Laws can be national, or international. E.G. UK Data Protection Act 1988, is a national version of the 1995 European Union Data Protection Directive.  
Laws can be criminal, or civil.

## Acts

-   Data Protection Act 1988/1998/2018: determines the way data about living people is stored and processed.
-   Computer Misuse Act 1990: defines the offence of accessing or modifying computer material without permission.
-   Copyright, Designs, & Patents Act 1988: covers the copying and use of other peoples' work
-   Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000: regulates surveillance and investigation, and covers the interception of communications

### Data Protection Act 1988/1998/2018

This determines the way data (digital and physical) about people is stored and processed.
It outlines that the storage and processing of personal (living and identifiable people) details must:

1. be fair and lawful
2. be relevant and not excessive
3. be accurate and up to date
4. only kept as long as needed
5. only be used for the stated purpose
6. be stored securely
7. be handled in line with peoples' rights
8. not be transferred to countries without protection laws

There are 3 exceptions:

-   National Security: E.G. Suspected Terrorists
-   Crime and Texation: E.G. Police Surveilance
-   Domestic Purposes: E.G. Personal contacts application/book

### Computer Misue Act 1990

It outlines:

-   Unauthorised access to computer material
-   Unauthorised access with intent to commit or facilitate a crime
-   Unauthorised modification of computer material
-   Making, supplying or obtaining anything which can be used in computer misuse offences

Examples of offences against this act:

-   Spreading a Virus
-   Attempting to log in without authorisation
-   Using someone else's login
-   Reading, editing, or deleting data
-   Obtaining or creating a "packet sniffer"

### Copyright, Designs, & Patents Act 1988

This protects peoples' creations and designs. It stops their creations from being copied.

### Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000

ISPs assist in the surveillance.  
Enables mass surveillance of communications in transit and monitoring of Internet activities.  
Enables some public bodies to demand that someone have over keys to protected info.  
Prevent the existence of interception warrants and any data collected with them from being revealed in court.
