noted : 14/09/22

# 2.2 Types of Operating Systems

Features of operating systems:

-   Distribution
-   Embedded
-   Multi-tasking
-   Real-time operating systems

## Distributed OS

A distributed OS can coordinate the processing of a single job across multiple computers  
For example, google home.

This means that a program can use data or resources (processor time, memory and I/O facilities) from another computer, so the user can access more computational power.  
This means that there is no need for training or writing programs differently, but the programmer has no control over the task distribution.

## Embedded OS

An embedded OS has minimal UI and RAM, application programs are held n ROM.

## Multitasking System

A single processor can appear to do more than one task at a time by scheduling processor time.

### Multi-user

Some systems use a very powerful computer called a mainframe  
Lots of users with their own terminal access the mainframe's CPU and each gets a time slice.  
Each terminal is also running multiple processes.

### Mobile OS

A smartphone is a computer with a multitasking system  
The OSes are linked to specific hardware  
A low level proprietary OS handles hardware and special features.  
The main OS handles user interface and applications

### Open-source OS

Android is an open-source OS used by major device manufacturers as it allows for major customisation.  
This means a manufacturer can tune the OS to meet a device's needs.

## Real Time OS

Some OS must respond extremely quickly to inputs and deal with simultaneous inputs.  
They are normally seen in safety-critical environments.  
If a hardware component fails, the OS must have a failsafe to detect this and respond.  
There is hardware redundancy (components are duplicated in case one fails)

#### Case Study - Therac-25 (1980's)

A radiation therapy machine with a real-time embedded OS was used to treat cancer through extreme exposure to targeted beams of radiation.  
However, programming errors meant that the machine responded incorrectly to certain real time inputs, so several people died by accidentally being hit by massive radiation overdoses

## How the OS is used with other hardware

### BIOS

(Basic Input Output System) stored in ROM, boots the computer at start-up by loading OS into RAM.  
It initialises and tests hardware.

### Device Drivers

A driver is a program that provides a UI for the OS to communicate with a device by allowing it to do so.  
But the OS does not need to know the details of the hardware to interact with it.

### Virtual Machine

Software can be used to emulate a machine.  
An OS can be run inside another to emulate different hardware

# Summary

There are 4 types of OS; distributed, embedded, multitasking and real-time OS. The BIOS is stored on the ROM and loads the OS into the RAM. The user uses a device driver to allow the OS to communicate with a device. Virtual machines can be used to emulate different OS and hardware.

# Revision Questions

<details>
  <summary>What are the 4 types of OS?</summary>
  <p>These are, distributed OS, embedded OS, multi-tasking OS and real-time OS</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the Distributed OS.</summary>
  <p>A distributed OS can coordinate the processing of a single task across multiple computers. It can also use data or resources from another computer.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the Embedded OS.</summary>
  <p>Applications are stored in the ROM and there is very little RAM. It is used for simple, single-purpose devices.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the Multi-tasking OS</summary>
  <p>Appears to do more than one task at a time by scheduling processor time</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the Real-time OS</summary>
  <p>These are super-fast responding systems used in saftey-critical envrionments. They must have a fail-safe to detect hardware components failing.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the BIOS.</summary>
  <p>The BIOS loads the OS from ROM into the RAM.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe Device Drivers.</summary>
  <p>A device driver is software that allows the OS to communicate with a device. The OS also hides the complexity of hardware from the user by providing a UI</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe Virtal Machines</summary>
  <p>Software can be used to emulate different hardware and a different OS or version of an OS</p>
</details>
