noted : 18/10/22

# Stranger Things

## How does the opening use production techniques to provide audience with genre clues?

Stranger Things is a Netflix Original show consisting of a hybrid genre; horror, sci-fi, teen, coming of age. In the opening 8 minutes of season 1 episode 1, a combination of lighting and color is used to create meaning for the audience. // The episode opens with a long, barely-lit hospital-like hallway. Then the lights being to flicker furiously as well as a blaring red alarm flashing in consistent intervals. Both of these lighting effects clearly indicate that this is a dangerous, unsettling and off-putting mystery element to this scene that would later foreshadow the mystery of Will Byers. // Later in the episode, a similar lighting set-up is used when that mystery element interacts with Will Byers. This repetition builds tension in the audience, as we known what is going to happening in each scene, but not in the bigger picture. This introduces the horror genre of the show at the beginning.  
Additionally, a combination of sound and music is used to create meaning for the audience. Throughout the opening there is eerie sounds and music used to subtly build tension. However there is also a lack ofsounds at some point as this makes the audience focus more on their own surroundings and the lack of sound creates a sense of unease. Furthermore there is sounds of the environment in the dark used. All of these sounds are used to make the scenes scary for the audience. This technique is used throughout to build tension and therefore horror.