noted : 27/09/22

# 1.5 Output Devices

Output devices take data produced by a computer and turn it into human-readable format.

## Printers

| Printer | Desc |
|:-----|:-----|
| Inkjet| Most common form|
| Laser | Second most common form. Uses dry ink called toner. Fast and reliable with excellent print quality |
| Dot Matrix | Outdated. Strikes an inked ribbon which imprints dots to form characters |
| 3D | Prints with plastic, resin, ceramic, metal, paper. Used to make prosthetic limbs, orthotics, reconstructive or general surgery, and unfortunately: weapons. |


## Radio Frequency ID (RFID)

RFID system are I/O devices.  
They use a transponder and a receiver.
They have several uses:

-   Identification of people, animals or goods.
-   Shipping and supply of chain tracking for goods
-   Banking and fast-payment systems
-   Replacement for barcode systems

They use tags:

| Tags    | Description                                                                        |
| :------ | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Passive | no power source so rely on radio waves from a receiver for energy                  |
| Active  | battery powered beacon that broadcasts its own signal to receivers up to 300m away |

## Actuators

An actuator is a motor used in conjunction to sensors, to control mechanisms. For example, opening a value or door, starting a pump, turning a fan.

## Loudspeakers & Headphones

Digital data sent from the device to a DAC (Digital to Analogue Converter) for conversion.
The converted signal is then boosted using an amplifier and then sent to a speaker.

## Monitors


### LCD Monitors

Each pixel contains a red, green and blue diode.  
Behind each pixel is a backlight, as the diodes do not emit light themselves.

### LCD vs CCFL

LCD is better than CCFL for these reasons:

-   brighter
-   reaches maximum brightness faster
-   Sharper
-   Wider, and more accurate colour range
-   Thinner screens 
-   More reliable
-   Consume less power, so produces less heat and costs less

### Organic LED Screen (OLED)

OLED is better than above because of the following:

-   Thinner
-   Brighter
-   No need for backlight
-   Consume less power, so produce less heat
-   Better viewing angle

## Multimedia Light Projectors

Compact, high-res, colour projectors are used for projecting a device's screen.  
It does this by taking a video signal, converting it into a viewable image and projecting it.  
They may be used for presenting presentations, or videos. 