noted : 04/10/22

# 1.6 Storage Devices

## RAM & ROM

|            | RAM                                   | ROM              |
| :--------- | :------------------------------------ | :--------------- |
| Stands for | Random Access Memory                  | Read Only Memory |
| Stores     | OS, running programs, data being used | BIOS             |
| Volatile   | Yes                                   | No               |
| Read/Write | Read & write                          | Read             |

## How it all works

When you switch on your computer, the startup instructions load the operating system from your hard disk into RAM.

### RAM Memory

-   When applications or programs are loaded, they are copied into RAM from secondary storage (e.g. hard disk).
-   Documents (data) that are used with those programs are also opened by copying them into RAM as the working memory.
-   RAM starts to fill up.

### Running out of space

-   You now want to open a browser to search the Internet.
-   The browser software needs more memory than you have free in RAM.

### Virtual Memory

-   Virtual memory is part of the hard drive used as an extension to RAM.

## Primary and Secondary Storage

Primary storage is volatile and usually refers to RAM.  
Secondary storage refers to non-volatile storage.

-   Magnetic storage such as the hard disk
-   Optical storage that uses laser light such as CD-ROM
-   Solid-state devices using flash memory

### Secondary Storage Devices

Different technologies have evolved for saving data. Each of these has its own advantages and disadvantages in terms of:

-   Durability
-   Read/write speed
-   Capacity
-   Portability
-   Cost

### Inside a Hard Disk

#### Tracks, Sectors, and Platters

-   Concentric tracks are created on a magnetic disk.
-   Disk spins at high speed: 3,600 – 7,200 RPM.
-   Spinning platters are each read by drive heads.
-   Data is read or written as the sector moves under the head.

## Company Server Data

-   Hard disks have very high capacity.
-   Fast read and write speeds.
-   Relatively cheap storage per TB.

## Cloud Storage

## Solid State Drives

Solid-state media commonly uses electrically programmable non-volatile flash memory.

Advantages and disadvantages of solid-state media:

-   More durable
-   SSD cards have no moving parts, so they can survive drops, extreme heat and cold, and extreme pressure.
-   Typically less capacity than a hard disk.
-   Faster than hard disk drives.
-   Consume less power.
-   More portable.
-   More expensive than hard disk drives.

## USB Flash Drives

-   Can store up to 128 GB of data; that’s 2,500 photos.
-   Prices start at under £5.00.
-   Can use password protection.
-   Useful for transferring data between computers.

## CDs, DVDs, and Blu-ray

Why are the capacities of these discs different given they are all the same physical size?

-   Different laser wavelengths ‘burn’ smaller pits.
-   The spiral track can, therefore, be more tightly wound, creating a longer track.

### Optical Disk Formats

Optical disks are available as: - Read only - Recordable - Re-writable formats

#### Software Mailing

-   Often best suited to optical disks.
-   Cheap to manufacture and distribute.
-   Robust during carriage.
-   Lightweight.

#### CD Formats

CDs come in three different formats:

-   CD-ROM (Read only)
-   CD-R (Recordable)
-   CD-RW (Rewritable)

CD-ROM is “pressed” at the time of manufacture.  
CD-R can be written to once.  
CD-RW can be written, read many times, erased, and written again.

#### Uses for Optical Disks

-   CD-ROM is widely used for software distribution.
-   CD-R may be used for copying a game, software, audio, or video files or documents. These can then easily be stored offline.
-   CD-RW useful for short- or medium-term backup or transferring files from one computer to another.
-   DVD and Blu-ray are high-capacity discs which can store feature-length films.

### Capacity and Access Speed

| Media            | Capacity     | Access Speed |
| :--------------- | :----------- | :----------- |
| Hard Disk        | 0.5-6 TB     | Fast         |
| CD-ROM           | 700 MB       | Medium       |
| DVD              | 5-9 GB       | Medium       |
| Blu-ray Disk     | 25-50 GB     | Medium       |
| Solid State Disk | 0.004 - 2 TB | Very Fast    |
