noted : 03/01/23

# Exchanging Data

## Data transfer and storage

Data is constantly moved around computers and networks.  
The transfer is usually faster and more accurate, when the distance from sender to reviver is shorter.

## Reducing data requirements

Reducing data to send or store ensures that:

- Data sends more quickly.
- Less bandwidth is used
- Buffering on AV streams is less likely
- Less storage required

## Compressing Data

There are 2 types of compression:

|Compression | Definition | E.G.     |File Format(s)|
|:-----|:-----|:-----|:-----|
|Lossy | Non-essential data is permanently removed      | Frequencies of sound that humans can not hear | JPG, MP3|
|Lossless | Patterns in data are spotted and "summariesd" in a shorter format. New file created from summarised data without loss of data.      | Compressions text files or software code      | MP3 |

### Lossy

Non-essential data is permanently removed. EG frequencies of sound that humans can not hear

#### JPG

Removes data perm to reduce file size.  
Tries to reconstruct image without the missing data.  
So file size is decreases as well as quality.

#### MP3

Removes sound in the frequency ranges that we cannot perceive.  
Quitter notes played at the same time as louder sounds are also removed.

### Lossless

Patterns in the data are spotted and summarised in a shorter format without any information.  
Using this method, a new file can be replicated exactly without loss.  
Reduction is less

#### Run Length Encoding of Sound

A sound recording could have thousands of samples taken every second (44,000)

-   The same sound or note played for a fraction of a second could result in hundreds of identical samples
-   RLE records one example of the sample and how many times it is consecutively repeated.

#### Dictionary Compression

Spots regularly occurring data and stores it separately in a dictionary.

-   Reference to entry dictionary is stored in the main file, so reduces original data stored

##### Compressing larger volumes

in a text

## Encryption

A way of ensuring that data cannot be understood without a way to understand it.  
When received, the ciphertext is decrypted back to plaintext using the same or different key.  
Two opposites are the Caesar Cipher (low security )and the Vernam Cipher (high security).

### Caesar Cipher

The Caesar cipher is the most basic and insecure type of encryption.  
Letters of the alphabet are shifted by a consistent number.

-   Spaces are often removed to mask word length

#### Brute Force Attack
An attack that attempts to apply every possible key to decrypt ciphertext.

#### Frequency Analysis
Frequency analysis can hint to which letters are which.

### Vernam Cipher

The encryption key (one time pad), is the only cipher that is unbreakable.  
The key must be:

-   A truly random sequence greater or equal in length than the plaintext and only ever used once once
-   shared with the recipient by hand, independently of the message, and destroyed immediately after use.

#### Decoding

Encryption and decryption of the message is performed bit by bit using an exclusive or (XOR) operation with the shared key.

## Algorithmic security

Keys are determined by comp algorithm.  
Key derived from algorithm.

### Symmetric Encryption

Same key is used to decrypt and decrypt data.  
Means that the key must lo be transferred to the recipient

### Asymmetric encryption

2 separated but related keys. One public. One private.  
So those wishing to send messages can do so with that key, but those messages can only be decrypted with the one private key.

### Hashing

Provides mapping between between an arbitrary length input and a usually fixed length or smaller output. It is one-way; you cannot get back to the original.  
Useful for storing encrypted PINs and passwords so that they cannot be read by a hacker.
