noted : 3/10/23

# Database Concepts

## A Simple database

Simplest type of database is a flatflie database containing information about a single entity.  
An Entity is a category of a thing of interest about which we will store data.

## Primary Key

Each entity needs and identifier. This identifier is the primary key.

## Composite Primary Key

These are keys made from more than one field. It is like a combination of information to ensure more accurate identification in databases.

## Secondary Key

The primary key of an entity is autmoatically indexed so instances can be easily found and managed.  
However, seacheres can be made other ways, like by using other fields.  
For example, searching for a customer in a database by their name or email, rather than their customer ID. In this case, the name or email could be the secondary key.

## Relationships

Entities are related. They can either be:

- One-to-one
- One-to-many
- Many-to-one

### Entity Relationship Diagrams (ERDs)

A way of visually representing the relationship between entities in a database.

INSERT IMAGE HERE

## Database Structure

An Entity is represented by a table. These tables are often refered to as relations.  
Relations contains rows and columns. Rows represent a record/instance. The columns represent a field/attribute belonging to the records.

### Creating Relationships

Relationships between entities are made by including the Primary Key of entity A, in entity B. This then becomes a foreign key for entity B.  
A foreign key is an attribute that creates a link between to relations.

## Referential Integrity

This means that no foreign key in a table, can reference a non-existent record in a related table.
