noted : 28/11/2023

# Transaction Processing

## Data Captures

Manual methods of data capture are often filled out by hand and then need to be typed in manually.  
Data caputing can be automated:

-   Smart card readers
-   Barcode readers
-   Scanners
-   Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
-   Optical Mark Recognition (OMR)
-   Magnetic ink character recognition
-   Sensors

## Inputting Data

Once data has been collected it can be transferred to a database by:

-   automatically inputting using DBMS software
-   typing it in using a customised form
-   importing from a spreadsheet or file
-   using an Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)

### EDI

An EDI is used to transfer data between one system and another.  
EDI is the computer-to-computer exchange of documents betwen two companies/businesses. These could be purchase orders, invoices, or shipping documents.  
This replaces post, email and fax.
All documents must be in a stanfard format so that a computer can understand them.

EDI translaters can be used to translate the EDI format so it can be directly inputted into a database.

## Selecting Data

SQL can be used to select and order, data satisfying specific critera. It can be used in reports, letters, mailing labels, to print out barcodes, etc.

## Transaction Processing

A transaction is 1 logical operation.
The transaction can consist of several operations.  
For example a customer order could consist of several order lines. Each must line must:

-   be processed
-   the quantity of each product adjusted on the stock file
-   credit card details checked
-   payment accepted or rejected

## ACID

Properties that ensure database integrity is always maintained and that transactions are processed reliably.

| Property    | Explanation                                                                                                 |
| :---------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Atomicity   | Requires that transactions be processed entirely or not at all                                              |
| Consistency | Ensures that transactions can't violate any defined validation rules                                        |
| Isolation   | Ensures concurrent execution of transactions leads to the same result as if they were executed sequentially |
| Durability  | Ensures that committed transactions remain so                                                               |

## Multi-user Databases

Multiple users simultaneously accessing a database can cause issues.

For example, Jake accesses a customer record by copying it to his local storage. Then Jake stats to edit the record.  
But then Tom,
