noted : 13/09/23

# Optimisation Algorithms

## Djikstra's Shortest Path Algorithm

This algorithm finds the shortest path between a start node and every other node - in a weighted algorithm. The weights between nodes can represent many things. For exanple, distance, time, or cost of travel.

This algorithm can be used in circuit board design, route planning, games strategy, and project management.

### Walkthrough

## Computable Problems

### Limits of computation

Limits are imposed by:

- Algorithmic complexity
- Hardware

Problems that were insolvable many years ago, are now computable.

## TPS (Travelling Salesman problem)

Common optimisation problem.

Applications:

- 

### Brute Force

Brute force tests all posible routes.


## Tractable Problems

Problems with polynomial-time solution is called a tractable problem.  
Algorithms with time compexities are all efficient algorithms.

## Intractable Problems

Is one that does not have a polynomial time solution.  
Algorithms of time complexity O(2<sup>2<sup>) and O(n!) are examples of inefficient algorithms.

## Heuristic Methods

It may be easier to get an appeoximate answer that is good enough.  
A heuristic approach us one which tries to find a solution which is adequate for its purpose.

## The A* Algorithm

Is made of 2 functions:

- g(x) - the cost from the source to a node (e.g. distance or time)
- h(x) - the approx. cost from a node to the end node - This is a heuristic function that finds an adequate solution.

The A* algorithm calculates the total cost of each node by:
- f(x) = g(x) + h(x)

The algorithm stipulates that h(x) should never be greater than g(x).
It focuses on getting to the end node rather than finding the lowest cost or shortest path to every node.