noted : 08/11/22

# Programming Paradigms

## Programming Paradigms

A paradigm is a style or way of programming. Some languages only support one paradigm. others more.

| Programming Paradigm | Supported Language(s) |
|:-----|:-----|
| Procedural  | Python, C#, Basic, Pascal      |
| Declarative  | SQL, Prolog      |
| Functional  | JavaScript, Haskell, Logo |
| Object-oriented  | Python, Java, C++, Visual Basic      |

## Procedural/Imperative Programming

Imperative programming is Procedural programming but without procedure calls.  
Languages that support imperative programming, consists of a series of instructions that tell the computer what to do with the input.

### Structured Programming

A form of procedural (imperative) programming paradigm which uses selection, sequence, iteration and recursion rather than `goto` statements.  
Modular techniques are used to split a large program into manageable chunks.

## Declarative Programming

Statements are used to describe the problem, then the language works out how to do it.
This is well suited to expert systems which embodies the facts and rules about a particular field of knowledge. For example:
-   Medical
-   Oil exploration
-   Tax regulations
-   processing natural language, English, Russian, Urdu, etc
### Logic Programming

A form of decorative programming.  
A paradigm that expresses the logic of a computation without expressing its control flow. (you say what to do, and it says how)

## Object-oriented Programming

OOP languages were developed to make it possible to abstract details of implementation away from the user.  
It is easy to design, reuse, and easy to maintain.  
A program consists of objects:

-   each object has its own data (attributes) and operations on that data (methods)
-   objects interact with one another
-   all processing is done by objects
    e.g.:  
    a program to keep records of bank accounts  
    the object: account  
    the attributes: user and account detail  
    the method: deposit / withdraw money
### Classes

A class is a blueprint for an object that defines attributes and methods that capture the common characteristics and behaviours of objects.

### Encapsulation

A fundamental of OOP  
Attributes and methods are wrapped into a single entity.

### Information Hiding

An object's attributes are hidden (private)  
Attributes are accessed and changed only through the objects methods, which are needed to set and retrieve an object attributes.  
To interact with an object, its methods must be public.

### Inheritance

Objects can be related. EG cat and rodent share class animal. This means they will inherit same attributes and methods of the class.  
They may also have their own attributes.

#### The 'is a' rule

Ask: "Is object A an object B?"

#### Polymorphism

An inherited class may have attributes and methods that do not exist in the parent class. It may redefine methods that are defined in the parent class.
