noted : 13/09/22

# 1.2 Processor Performance

## Words

Memory is divided into equal units called words.  
Word lengths can be 8, 16, 32 or 64 bits long.
Each word has a memory address.

## Buses

### Address Bus

Width of address bus determines the maximun possible memory addresses of the system.  
With an 8-bit address bus, the max number of memory addresses is 2<sup>8</sup> = 256.

### Data Bus

The data bus is bi-directional as data can be sent both ways along the bus.  
The width of the bus is the same width as a computer word, data can be transfered to and from memory in a single operation.

## Format of Instructions

There is a 1:1 correspondence between machine code instructions and it's assembly language equivelance.

The architecture of a computer (including, the word size and width of the address bus) determines the format of a machine code instruction.

The max size of the operand will depend on the width of the address bus.

## Factors Affecting Performance

-   Clock speed
-   Number of cores
-   Amount and type of cache memory

### Clock speed

The faster the clock speed, the faster the processor can complete the FDE cycle, the greater the performance.

#### The System Clock

A series of regular ON/OFF signals are used to sync the operations of the processor components.  
Actions are carried out on the rising edge of the clock.  
Actions each take a fixed number of cycles to complete.

### Number of Cores

The greater the number of cores, the more instructions can be parallelly processed , the greater the performance.

A processor with multiple cores has them linked together in the same integrated circuit.
Each core is able to process a different instruction at the same time with its own FDE cycle. Making a quad core computer faster than a single core.

#### Parallel Processing

Using several processor cores simultaniously is known as parallel pocessing.

### Cache Memory

Cache is very small but superfast memory that stores data and instructions that have recently been used by the CPU.

| Speed                      | fastest                  | --------> | --------> | slowest                  |
| :------------------------- | :----------------------- | :-------- | :-------- | :----------------------- |
| <strong>Cache lvl</strong> | L1 cache                 | L2 cache  | L3 cache  | L4 Cache                 |
| <strong>Size</strong>      | <strong>smallest<strong> | <-------- | <-------- | <strong>biggest</strong> |

### Pipelining

A technique used to improve performance, for example by overlapping stages in the FDS cycle, or by breaking down the stages in an arithmetic instruction.  
There may be 10 or 12 stages in the pipeline, with some stagse taking longer than others.

# Summary

The performance of a processor depends on the clock speed, number of cores and cache. The faster the clock speed, the better the CPU performance. The more cores, the better the CPU performance. the faster and more cache, the better the CPU performance. Piplining is a technique used to improve performance by overlapping instructions on the FDE cycle

# Revision Questions

<details>
  <summary>What are words?</summary>
  <p>Words are equal lengthed units of memory.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>What are the 3 factors that affect performance of a CPU?</summary>
  <p>The clock speed, number of cores and cache.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe and explain how these factors affect performance.</summary>
  <p>The greater the clock speed, the greater the performance as this means the FDE cycle is completed faster.<br>The greater the number of cores, the greater the performance, as the CPU can parallel process which means that it can perform a task per core simultaniously.<br>The greater speed and size of cache, the greater the performance as cache is super fast, but small memory that stores data and instructions that havebeen recently used by the CPU</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>What is pipelining?</summary>
  <p>Pipelining is a performance improving technique. It can improve performance by overlapping instructions on the FDE cycle.</p>
</details>
