noted : 13/09/22

# 1.3 Types of Processor

## Stored Program Concept
A program must be loaded into main memory to be executed  
The instructions are processed with the FDE cycle sequentially  
The sequence of instructions can only be changed by a condition or unconditional jump instruction.

## Architectures

|Architecture |Description |Advantages |Disadvantages|
|:-------------|:-----------|:----------|:------------|
|Von Neumann |Instructions and data are stored in a common main memory and transfered using a single shared bus |<details>Simplifies design of CU<br>Data and instructions use same word length and share the same memory</details> |<details>One bus for data and instructions is a bottleneck</details> |
|Harvard |Separates data and instructions into separate memories using different buses |<details>Separate buses allow parallel access to data and instructions<br>Different sized memories and word lengths can be used for data and instructions<br>Used in embedded systems where speed takes priority</details> |<details>CU for more buses is more complicated and expensive</details> |

### Contemporary Processor Architectures
Modern CPU chips incorperate aspects of both architecutures.  
In a desktop, there is one main memory for holding data and instructions.  
But cache is divided into instruction cache and data cache so this is retrieved using the Harvard architecture

## CISC & RISC

|Instruction Set |Description |Advantages |
|:---------------|:-----------|:----------|
|CISC |large instruction set is used to do tasks very few lines of assembly language<br>Combines a "load/store" instruction with the instruction that carries out the actual calculation |<details>Quicker to code<br>Compiler has little to do<br>code is short so little RAM needed</details> |
|RISC |Minimum number of veryy simple instructions are used to do all the required operations in multiple general purpose registers |<details>Hardware is simpler to build<br>pipelining is possible as each tasks takes same amount of time<br>RAM is cheap and RISC's use of RAM and software allows for better performance at less cost</details> |

For example, in CISC:  
````
MULT A, B
````
Will look like this in RISC:  
````
LDA R1, A
LDA R2, B
MULT R1, R2
STO R1 A
````

## Multi-core & Parallel Systems
Multi-core processors share the workload across more than 1 core, to achieve a higher performance by processing in parallel.  
Software must be written to be able to use multiple cores.  

## Co-processor systems
A co-processor is another processor used to reinforce the functions of the CPU.

## GPU
A GPU is a specialised processing unit used for manipulating computer graphics and image processing.  
It is made up of thousands of small efficient cores designed to parallel process efficiently.  
A CPU works with a CPU to accelerate processing.

# Summary
Programs must be loaded into RAM to be executed. This can either be implemented by the Von Neuman or Harvard Architecture. Mordern CPUs incorperate aspects of both. There are also 2 instruction sets, CISC and RISC. CISC aims to complete tasks in as few lines of assembly language as possible. RISC does the opposite. Multi-core and parallel systems share the workload across multiple cores to achieve a better performance in parallel. A co-processor is an extra processor uesd to reinforce the functions of the CPU. The GPU is another processing unit specialised in graphics and image processing.

# Revision Questions

<details>
  <summary>Describe the stored program concept.</summary>
  <p>The concept says that a program must be loaded into the RAM to be executed. Instructions are then processed by the FDE cycle sequentially.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Name the 2 architectures.</summary>
  <p>Von Neuman and Harvard</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the first architecture.</summary>
  <p>Instructions and data are both stored in the same memory and are transfered using the same bus.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the second architecture.</summary>
  <p>This separates data and instructions into separate memories, and are transfered with differeny buses.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the adantages and disadvantages of the first architecture.</summary>
  <p>The Von Neuman architecture simplifies the design of the Control unit. Also data and instructions are the same word length and share the same memory. However, as the data and instruction is transfered using the same bus, this becomes a performance bottleneck.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe the advantages and disadvantages of the second architecture.</summary>
  <p>The Harvard Architecture uses separate buses to allow parallel access to data and instructions. Also, different sized memories andword lengths can be used. Finally it can be used in embedded systems where speed takes priority. However, the control unit for more buses is more complicated and expensive.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe CISC and it's advantages.</summary>
  <p>CISC is a large instruction set used to do tasks in as few lines of assembly language as possible.It is quicker to code as the compiler has little to do.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe RISC and it's advantages.</summary>
  <p>A minimum number of very simple instructions are used to do all the necessary operations in multiple general purpose registers.This allows for simpler hardware needed. Also pipelining is possible as each tasks takes the same amount of time.Finally RAM is cheap and RICS's use of RAM and software allows for better performance at less cost.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>How does multi-core processors use parallel processing to achieve a greater performance?</summary>
  <p>They share the workload across more than 1 core and parallel process, but software must be written to take advantage of multi-core processors.</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>What is a co-processor used for?</summary>
  <p>It is used to reinforce the functions of the CPU. EG a GPU</p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Describe a GPU.</summary>
  <p>A GPU is a speciallised procesesing unit used to manipulate graphics and images. It is made up of thousands of small but efficient core designed to parallel process.</p>
</details>