noted : 22/09/22

# 1.4 Input Devices

## Manual Input Devices
All input devices transfere data from the source to the computer. Some input devices require human interventionto genetare data.
eg:
- keyboards
- pointing devices
- mics
- touchscreens
- smartboards

## Barcode Readers
Two types of barcode systems.  
- UPC-A used in retail and warehousing  
can represent numberic digits
- Code 128 used in transport and shipment tracking  
can represent numbers and letters

## QR codes
Can be read by smartphones and tablets.  
Direct to websites and information.  
uses:
- restaurant coupons
- mobile concert ticketse
- buisness cards
- tourist info
- adverts

## 2D Scanners
Used to convert paper copy into a computer-readable format.  
Usefull for emailing hand-drawn images or text to someone else

## 3D face recongnition
Used by security cameras.  
software measures and compares proportions of a face with those pre-known

## 3D Scanners
Used in industrial and medical fields.  
Done by tomography. This is the process of imagine something in very thin slices.  
Such as MRI scans

## Sensor
A sensor is a device that can take measurments of physical properties    
Data is taken as analogue so must be converted into digital.  
  
Types of sensor:
- Gas
- Infra-red
- Light
- Temperature
- Pressure
- pH
- Magnetic Field
- Mosture
- Acoustic

### Analogue Measurements
analogue means data has no discrete value so the data changes smoothly rather than in exect jumps.  


## Monitoring and Control
Monitoring. The computer does not make changes to the process, it only reports the values  
Control. The output can alter how the process operates and can change the value of next input recieved