noted : 27/09/22

# 1.5 Output Devices

Output devices take data produced by a computer and turn it into human-readable format.

## Printers

### Inkjet Printer

Most common form of printer.

#### Costs

Printers are sold below production cost. Ink is dramatically marked up above production cost.

### Laser Printers

Second most common form. They use dry ink called toner. They are fast and reliable. Print quality is excelent.

### Dot Matrix Printers

They are not common as they are outdated. They strike an inked ribbon whihc imprints dots to form letters.

### 3D Printers

Can print using plastic filament, powdered resin, ceramic or metal powder or paper.

#### Applications of 3D printers

They can make prosthetic limbs or orthotics and can be used in reconstructive or general surgery.  
They can be used for manufactoring car parts.

#### Dangers of 3D printers

Printing weapons

## Radio Frequency ID (RFID)

RFID system are I/O devices.  
They use a transponder and a reciever.

### Uses of RFID

-   identification of people, animals or goods.
-   Shipping and supply of chain tracking for goods
-   banking and fast-payment systems
-   replacement for barcode systems

### Passive and Active tags

| Tags    | Description                                                                        |
| :------ | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Passive | no power source so rely on radio waves from a receiver for energy                  |
| Active  | battery powered beacon that broadcasts its own signal to receivers up to 300m away |

## Actuators

Motors used in conjunction to sensors, to control mechanisms. For example:

-   opening a valve or door
-   starting a pump
-   turning a fan

## Loudspeakers & Headphones

Digital data sent from the device to a DAC (Digital to Analogue Converter) for conversion.
The converted signal is then boosted using an amplifier and then sent to a speaker.

## Monitors

### LCD Monitors

Each pixel contains a red green and blue diode.  
Behind each pixel is a backlight as teh diodes do notemit light themselves.

### LEDs in LCD's, vs CCFLs

Why LCD better than CCFL:

-   reach max brightness faster
-   brighter
-   sharper
-   better colors
-   thinner monitors
-   monitor more reliable
-   consume little power, so produce little heat and smaller cost

### Organic LED Screen (OLED)

Why OLED better than above:

-   thinner
-   brighter
-   no need for backlight
-   consume less power, so rroduce less heat
-   better viewing angle

## Multimedia Light Projectors

Compact, high-res, color projectors that are used for projecting a devices screen.
It does this by taking a video signal, converting into a viewable image and projecting it. For example:

-   popwerpoint
-   videos
