<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>

noted : 11/10/22

# System Analysis methods

## Software Development

Follows cyclic stages:

- Analysis
- Design
- Implementation
- Evaluation
- Maintenance

### Analysis

A system analyst gathers information about:

- what the current system (if there is one) does
- what needs changing

To do this they may:

- interview customers
- use questionaires
- gather the clients requirements
- clients customers (users of the software)
- look at existing software

#### Output from Analysis

The system analysis will produce a document called a "System Spec" or "User Requirements".  
This defines what teh system will do.  
It iis ued to create the disign and evaluate the finished product.

### Design

Design includes:

- A description of data: data type, format, validations
- database design
- input screens
- output screens and reports
- how the data will be processed
- how the software will be tested

### Implementation

- coding and testing the software
- writing user and technical documents
- installing the software for the user

#### Testing

##### Black Box

Carried out independantly of the code used in the program.  
Looks at the program spec and creates a set of test data that covers all the inputs, outputs and functions.

##### White Box

Depends on code logic.  
Tests are devised which test each path through the code at least once

#### Alpha Testing

Carried out by the software developer's team and the user.  
Reveals errors or omissions in the definition of systems requirements.  
Allows the user to discover that they want it to do.  
(Testing own product)

#### Beta Testing

Used when commercial software is being developed.  
Software given to a number of potential users who agree to send report of fualts.
(users testing product)

### Evaluation

The user now tests every aspect of the software to make sure it does what is should.  
It is checked against the original spec doc.

### Maintenance

| Type       | Definition                                     |
| :--------- | :--------------------------------------------- |
| Corrective | Bugs that are found after launch.              |
| Adaptive   | When software adapts to meet new requirements. |
| Perfecive  | Improving speeds, efficiency, functionality.   |

## The Waterfall Model

As each stage is completed, it is documented. Customer does not see the end result. Any change made often means the project has to be started again.  
When to use the waterfall model:

- requirements are very clear and fixed
- no ambigious requirements
- tech is well understood
- project is short

| Advantages                                           | Disadvantages                              |
| :--------------------------------------------------- | :----------------------------------------- |
| Easy to understand and use                           | Not much user involvement                  |
| Stages are separated with well written documentation | No working software until late in cycle    |
|                                                      | If user dislikes, it is too late to change |

## Spiral Model

The stages are repeatedly completed. Each time all 4 are completed, a prototype is made. This means that each prototype can be refined from the previous.  
When to use the spiral model:

- For medium to high risk projects
- when uses are unsure of their needs and what the possiblilites are
- when the requirements are complex
- for large projects that may take years to develope.

| Advantages                                                                                        | Disadvantages  |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :------------- |
| Software produced at early stage user feedback about issues or lack of functionality can be known | Time consuming |
|                                                                                                   | More costly    |
|                                                                                                   |                |

## The Agile Model

Softwaare is developed in rapid incremental cycles. Each version buils on previous functionality and each is thoroughly tested before release.  
When to use the agile model:

- when new changes need to be implemented
- in an expanding or developing business where users needs are continuosly changing and developing

| Advantages                                        | Disadvantages                                      |
| :------------------------------------------------ | :------------------------------------------------- |
| Rapid software delivery means satisfied customers | Lack of emphasis on design and documentation       |
| User involvement                                  | If unclear about desired outcome, project can fail |
| Chagnes in requirement can be implemented         | Only suitable for experienced programmers          |

### Extreme Programming

A type of softwar dev. Frequent releases of software are made in short cycles. Intended to improve productivity and responsiveness to changing customer requirements.  
(agile on steroids)

## Large Projects

if projects take a long time, personnel change, requirements change, tech changes, costs change so the project could get cannceled.

## Rapid Application Dev

workshops and focus groups gather requiremetns rather than official documents. Prototyping used to continually refine the system in response to user feedbaka. Each part of the system is producedwithin a strict time limit. Software components are reused wheneve possible.
