noted : 08/11/22

# Programming Paradigms

## Programming Paradigms

-   Procedural programming
-   object-oriented programming
-   declarative programming
-   functional

## What is a paradigm

A style or way of programming  
Some languages only support one paradigm, others more.

## Imperative Programming

Series of instructions, deals with input

### Structured Programming

A kind of procedural (imperative) programming which uses selection, sequence nad iteration and recursion rather than goto statements.  
Modular techniques are used to split a large programs into manageable chunks.

## Declarative Programming

like SQL, statements describe the problem, then works out how to do it.

### Logic Programming

A form of decorative programming.  
A paradigm that expresses the logic of a computation without expressing its control flow. ( you say what to do, and it says how)

### Bakctracking

Program can backtrack to the last decsision and try a different route until the goal is achieved

### Applications

-   Medical
-   Oil exploration
-   Tax regulations
-   processing natural language, english, russian, urdu, etc

## Object-oriented Programming

OOP languages were developed to make it possible to astact details of implementation away from the user.  
it is easy to design, reuse and easy to maintain.  
A program consists of objects:

-   each object has its own data (attributes) and operations on that data (methods)
-   objects interact with one naother
-   all processing is done by objects
    eg:  
    a program to keep records of bank accounts  
    the object: account  
    the attributes: user and account detail  
    the method: deposit / withdraw money

### Classes

A class is a blueprint for an object that defines attributes and methods that capture the common characteristics and behaviours of objects.

### Encapsulation

A fundemental of OOP  
Attributes and methods are wrapped into a single entity.

### Information Hiding

An objects attributes are hidden (private)  
Attributes are accessed and changed only through the obejcts methods, which are needed to set and retrieve an objects attributes.  
To interact with an object, its methods must be public.

### Inheritance

objects can be realted. EG cat and rodent share class animal. THis means they will inhert same attributes and methods of the class.  
They may also have their own attributes.

#### The 'is a' rule

Ask: "Is object A an object B?"

#### Polymorphism

An inherited class may have attributes and methods tht do not exist in the parent class. it may redefine methods that are defined the parent class.
