noted : 03/01/23

# Exchanging Data

## Data transfer and storage
Data is constantly moved arond computers.  
As distance gets longer, transfer

## Reducingw data requirements
Text image and sound data can significantly reduce size.

Reducing data to send or store ensures that:
- Data is 

## Compressing Data
There are 2 types of compressionm:

### Lossy
Non-essential data is permanently removed.  EG frequencies of sound that humans can not hear

#### JPG
removes data perm to reduce file size.  
tries to reconstruct image without the missing data.  
So file size is decreases as well as quality.

#### MP3
Removes sound in the frequency ranges that we cannot perceive.  
Quiter notes played at the same time as louder sounds are also removed.

### Lossless
Patterns in the data are spotted and summarised in a shorter format without and information.  
using this method, a new file can be replicated exeactly without loss.  
Reduction is less

#### Run Length Encoding of Sound
A sound recording could have thousands of samples taken every second (44,000)
- teh same sound or note played fora fraction of a second could result in hundreds of identical samples
- RLE records one example of the sample and how many times it is consecutively repeated.

#### Dictionary Compression
Spots regularly occuring data and stores it separately in a dictionary.
- reference to entry dictionary is stored in the main file so reduces original data stored

##### Compressing larger volumes
in a text

## Encryption
A way of ensuring that data cannot be understood without a way to understand it.  
When recieved, the ciphertext is decryoted back to plaintext using the same or different key.  
Two opposites are the Caesar Cipher (low security )and the Vernam Cipher (high security).

### Caesure Cipher
The caesar cipher is most basic and insecure type of encryption.  
Letters of the alphabet are shifted by a consistent number.  
- spaces are often removed to mask word length

#### Brute Force Attack
An attack that attempts to apply every possible key to decrypt ciphertext.

#### Frequency Analysis
Frequency analysis can hint to which letters are which.  

### Vernam Cipher
The encryption key (one time pad), is the only cipher that is unbreakable.  
The key must be:
- A truly random sequence greater or equal in length than the plaintext and only ever used onceonce
- shared with the recipient by hand, independently of the message and destroyed immediately afater use.

#### Decoding
Encryption and decryption of the message is performed bit by bit using an exclusive or (XOR) operation with the shared key.