noted : 19/01/23

# Structure of the Intnet

## The internet
The interent is a network of inter-connected networks.
It is a WAN (Wide-area-network). The biggest.  
WWW is a collection of resources accessed via the internet.  

## Directing Traffic
Main part of the internet is known as backbone:  
The backbone of the internet is the mesh of super fast fibre-optic cables and routers that transfer data at super fast speeds to various points aroung the globe.  
These points are then connected to other regional networks - controlled by the internet Service providers (ISP).  

## Internet Addresses
Each device on a network needs to be uniquely id'd so data can be sent to the correct destination.
- like an address on a letter

### IP addressing

IPv4 addresses are made of four octet values (numbers described by 8 bits). separated by a full stop.  
this provides only 4.3 billion addresses
  
IPv6 addresses (128 bit). allows for more

## URL (Uniform Resource Locator)
URLs are used to specify the means of accessing a resource across a network and it's location.  
The protocol and domain name of the resource together form the URL

- http specifices that it is a web page
- www.___.co.uk/index.html specifies domain name
- these together specify URL: http://www.___.co.uk

## DNS (Domain Name Systems)
DNS servers are dedicated computers with an index of domain names and their IP addresses.  
A computer querie a DNS server for a domain name. if that is found, it will return the IP address that the computer can use to send a message to it.

## DNS server structure
There are 13 root DNS server that work together to catalogue every domain name.  
- these are segmented into geo groups or levels
- when the IP address of a given domain is unknown, it is refered to a related domain server that may know it.
they are normally resonsible for the top level domains

## Resolving an IP address
If a client has no cached record of an IP address for www.google.co.uk  
It sends a DNS query for that domain to it's specified DNS server  
If the DNS server does not have a record for it, then:  
either recursively handles the request so it can deliver an IP address  
or referes to a DNS server authoritative for example, .uk and follow this and subsequent referarals, to successively lower=level DNS servers

## Internet Registries
domains and IP's must be unique.  
There are 5 global Registries are responsible for allocating IP adresses to specific domain names.  
They work together to maintain a database of address assignments that ensure an IP and domain names are unique.  

## Internet Registrars


## Local Area Network (LAN)
A computer not connected to any other device is called a 'standalone'.  
All networks fall into 1 of 2 categories:
- LAN
- WAN

LAN: 2 or more computers connected together within a small geographical area.

## Network Topologies
A topologie is the arranfement of various computing devices which make up a computer.  

### Bus
All nodes are connected to a single backbone cable. 
Each end of the backbone is connected to either a terminator or computer which stops signals bouncing back.  
Each node is pasive - this means that  
Data is sent in one direction at a time only.  
Only 1 computer can transmit sucessfully at any 1 time

|Advantages | Disadvantages |
|:----------|:--------------|
|cheap to set up| main cable is a point of faliure|
|Devices can easily be added| Limited cable length|
|Good for small networks | performance degrades with heavy use, owing to data collisions|
| |poor security|

### Star
Computers are connected to a central node. This is often a switch.  
A switch sends each communication to the specific computer it is needed for.  

|Advantages | Disadvantages |
|:----------|:--------------|
|Easy to isolate problems| expensive to set up |
|better performance |central device is point of failure|
|more secure if a switch is used, as data is only sent to the recipient| |

## Physical vs Logical Topology
The physical topology of a network defines how the devices are physically conntected (wiring), whereas the logical topology defines how the devices communicate across those physical topologies (shape of path that data travels in).

## Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi is a wireless networking tech that provides high-speed internet connections.  
Devices connected to the internet via a WAP.  

### Wireless components
- Network interface Card (NIC)
- A station - consists of a computer and NIC- they share a radio frequency channel
- Wireless Access Point (WAP)
- Router - WAP and modem built into router

### Connecting to a wireless network
A wireless network requires a WAP. This has a range