noted : 24/01/23

# Internet Communications

## Circuit Switching

This creates a direct link between 2 devices for most of the communication.
EG the public telephone system.  
However, if 2 computers use this principle, bandwidth is wasted when nodata is being sent.

## Packet Switching

It is a method of communicating packets of data across a netowrk on which other similar communications are happening.  
The method in which packets are sent across a network from one router to the next is called packet switching.

## Data Packets

Data is broken into chunks called data packets and reassembled again at the recievingend.

### Chunking Data

Imagine that a 10GB file needs to be transfered across a network.  
If each packet can send 1,500 bytes, 10,000,000,000 bytes would require 6,666,667 packets.

### Travel Time

a packet travelling from A to C might take 40ms. From A to B might take 5ms.

## Routing

Routers forward packets from one network to another.

-   routers store data about the available routes to the destination node
-   they look up the destination IP address in it's routing table to find the best router to forward the packet to
-   transfers between routers is known as a hop
-   routers forward the packet until it reaches it's destination node

## Building a Packet

A data packet is a segment of data that needs to be sent (payload).  
As well as the data, the packet contains headers and trailers.

### Packet Header

Contains the recipients address so that it can be directed appropriately acress the network. Address of sender is also contained so that replies can be sent too.

Packet number and number of packets in the transfer is attatched to assist in reassembling the data.
Time to Live (TTL) or hop limit is also included

### Packet Trailer

Contains error checking components that check data received in the payload has not been corrupted.  
Techniques such as checksums or Cyclical Redundancy Checks (CRCs) are used to check the data by the recieving host.  
The same checksum is done when recieved. If they do not match the data has been corrupted and is sent again.

### Packet Size

Are kept small to ensuer that individual packets do not take long to transfer, preventing other packets from movin.  
500-1,5000 bytes is ideal.

## Protocols

A protocol is set of rules of the format of digital transmissions.  
It covers:

-   the size of packets
-   contents and format of header
-   error detection and correction

### Gateways

Is required when data travelling between routers using different protocols. Gateway translates between the protocols.

### Importance of protocols and standards

Protocols are standard accross all devices in all newtowkrs. In order for communication. The standard networking protocol is TCP/IP

## TCP/IP Protocol Stack

4 layers:

-   Application
-   Transport
-   Internet
-   Link
    These layers are connected. Each layer wraps the packets with its own header data.

## Application layer

Uses protocols relating to the use of applications for transmiting data over a network.
For example:

-   SMTP
-   FTP
-   HTTP

This layer specififes rules for transmittion.

## Transport layer

Uses the transmission control protocol (TCP) to establish connection with the recipient computer.  
This splits data into packets and numbers them sequentially.  
Adds port number to be used based on HTTP protocol.  
At the recieving end, the layer confirms that packets have been recieved and requests and any missing packets be resent.

## Internet layer

Uses the internet protocol (IP) to address packets with the source and destination IP addresses. (tells them where they came from and are going to go).  
routers forward packets to the destination. this is defined by combination of IP address and port number.  
Each router has routing table to instruct the next loop.

## Link layer

This layer operates accross a physical connection.  
Addsmac address of physical NIC that packets should be sent to based on the destination IP.  
MAC addresses change with each hop.

## Recieving data

at the destination the message is passed back up through the layers.

-   link layer removes MAC addresses from each packet and passes it to the internet layer.
-   internet layer removes IP address from each packet and passes it to the transport layer
-   transport layer removes the port number from each packets in the correct order and then reassembles them in the correct order and passes them to the application layer.
-   the application layer presents the imag data for the user in a browser.

## MAC addresses

a mac address uniquely identifies a physical devie with a NIC

### Port Numbers

a port is used to alert a specific app to deal with data sent to a computer.

## Transfering FIles with FPT

an application level protocol used to move files across a network.  
It uses the client-server model with a separate data and control channels operating on ports 20 and 21

## Sending and Receiving Emails

Mail servers are dedicated computers that are responsible for storing email providing access to clients and providing services to send emails.  
They use these protocols:

-   SMTP - used to send emails and forward them between mail servers to their destination.
-   POP3 - downloads email stored on a remote server to a local client
-   IMAP - manages emails on a server so multiple clients can access the same email accoount synchronicity.

### Email protocol comparison

IMAP holds mail on the server so that multiple devices can access all mail.  
POP downloads mail to a local device and removes it from the server
