noted : 07/02/23

# Network security and threats

## Firewall
A network can be protected by firewalls.  
A firewall can be software or hardware that controls access to and from a network.  
Ports are opened so that only certain traffic is allowed through.  

### Packet Filtering
Packets are inspected by the firewall to check which port they are attempting to access.  
Different network protocols use different ports.  
If the packet is allowed througj, the port must be opened for the duration of the connection or the firewall will reject it.  

## Proxy Servers
Proxy servers make a web request for your computer. This means your true request IP address is hidden from the recipient.  

### Functions of Proxy Servers

- enables anonymous surfing
- enables filtering undesirable online content
- logs user data with their requests
- provides cache of previously visited sites

## Encyption
Encypting is the act of encoding a plaintext message so that it cannot be deciphered unless you have a numerical decryption key.  
This means that the message cannot be understood if intercepted.  
However if the key is intercepted, then the entire process is void.

## Malicious Software
Malware damages data.  
Worms and viruses self-replicate.  
A virus emeds itself in other programs or data files.  
A virus needs users to help it spread.  

### Worms
A worm is a standalone program that does not require a user, to run it, for it to spread.  
They exploit vulnerabilities in the destination system and spread autoamtically.

### Trojans
A program is presented as useful and desirable. Trojans desciused as these programs.  
They cannot self replicate and often serve to open up back doors to the internet so that processing power, internet bandwidth and data can be remotely exploited.

### Phishing
Act of using communications software to contact users to redirect them to a fake website, in order to trick them into giving away personal information.

## Code Quality
Improving code quality and monitoring attempts to gain unauthorised access and protection can significantly redce threats from malware.  
Measures:
- guarding against buffer overflow attacks
- guarding against SQL injection attack
- Use of strong passwords
- Two-factor authentication
- Access rights

### Buffer Overflow
Programs can accidentally write data to a location that lacks space.  
The overflowed data may end up in a neighbouring space.  
Malware can deliberately cause and manipulate overflow ata which may then be read as malware.

### SQL Injection
A hacker can enter SQL commands via online database forms to change the processing.


### Monitoring
This can protect against the threat of hacking.  
These can be used:
- packet sniffers
- user access logs

### Prevention
Up-to-date patches to the OS and apps reduce culnerabilities.  
Up-to-date anti-malware software can prevent the spread of infection.
